docs/platform/deployment/custom-deployment.mdx, before:

---
title: Writing Custom Deployment Automation
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Writing Custom Redpanda Deployment Automation | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Technical guidance for engineers writing deployment systems for Redpanda."/>
</head>

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Redpanda supports several deployment tools for setting up a cluster:

- Ansible Playbook
- Helm Chart
- Kubernetes Operator

:::tip
Redpanda strongly recommends using one of these supported deployment tools. See [Deploying for Production](../../deployment/production-deployment).
:::

This page provides information for anyone creating their own 
automation for deploying Redpanda clusters; that is, anyone not using one
of these supported tools.

## Configure bootstrapping

Redpanda cluster configuration is written with the Admin API and
the `rpk cluster config` CLIs.

In the special case where you want to provide configuration to Redpanda
before it starts for the first time, you can write a `.bootstrap.yaml` file
in the same directory as `redpanda.yaml`.

This file is only read on the first startup of the cluster. Any subsequent
changes to `.bootstrap.yaml` are ignored, so changes to
cluster configuration must be done with the Admin API. 

The content format is a YAML dictionary of cluster configuration properties. For example, to initialize a cluster with Admin API authentication enabled
and a single superuser, the `.bootstrap.yaml` file would contain the following:

```
admin_api_require_auth: true
superusers:
- alice
```

With this configuration, the Admin API is not accessible until you bootstrap a user account.

## Bootstrap a user account

When using username/password authentication, it's helpful to be able to create one user before the cluster starts for the first time.

Do this by setting the `RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` environment variable
when starting Redpanda for the first time. The value has the format
`<username>:<password>`. For example, you could set `RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` to `alice:letmein`.

:::note
`RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` only creates a user account. You must still
set up authentication using cluster configuration.
:::

## Secure the Admin API

The Admin API is used to create SASL user accounts and ACLs, so it's
important to think about how you secure it when creating a cluster.

- No authentication, but listening only on 127.0.0.1: This may be appropriate
  if your Redpanda processes are running in an environment where only
  administrators can access the host.
- mTLS authentication: You can generate client and server x509 certificates
  before starting Redpanda for the first time, refer to them in 
  `redpanda.yaml`, and use the client certificate when accessing the Admin API.
- Username/password authentication: Use the combination of `admin_api_require_auth`,
  `superusers`, and `RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` to access the Admin API username/password
  authentication. You probably still want to enable TLS on the Admin API
  endpoint to protect credentials in flight.

## Configure the seed servers

Seed servers help new nodes join a cluster by directing requests from newly-started nodes to an existing cluster. The `seed_servers` node configuration property controls how Redpanda finds its peers when initially forming a cluster. It is dependent on the `empty_seed_starts_cluster` node configuration property.

Starting in Redpanda version 22.3, you should explicitly set `empty_seed_starts_cluster` to `false` on every node, and every node in the cluster should have the same value set for `seed_servers`. With this set of configurations, Redpanda clusters form with these guidelines:

- When a node starts and it is a seed server (its address is in the `seed_servers` list), it waits for all other seed servers to start up, and it forms a cluster with all seed servers as members.
- When a node starts and it is not a seed server, it sends requests to the seed servers to join the cluster. 
 
It is essential that all seed servers have identical values for the `seed_servers` list. Redpanda strongly recommends at least three seed nodes when forming a cluster. Each seed server decreases the likelihood of unintentionally forming a split brain cluster. To ensure nodes can always discover the cluster, at least one seed node should be available at all times.

By default, for backward compatibility, `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is set to `true`, and Redpanda clusters form with the guidelines used prior to version 22.3:
- When a node starts with an empty `seed_servers` list, it creates a single node cluster with itself as the only member.
- When a node starts with a non-empty `seed_servers` list, it sends requests to the nodes in that list to join the cluster. 
 
You should never have more than one node with an empty `seed_servers` list, which would result in the creation of multiple clusters.

:::important
Redpanda expects its storage to be persistent, and it's an error
to erase a node's drive and restart it. However, in some environments (like when migrating to a different node pool on Kubernetes), truly persistent storage is unavailable,
and nodes may find their data volumes erased. For such environments, Redpanda recommends setting `empty_seed_starts_cluster` to false and designating a set of seed nodes such that they couldn't lose their storage simultaneously.
:::

## Configure node IDs 

Redpanda automatically generates unique node IDs for each new node. This means that you don't need to include node IDs in configuration files or worry about policies on `node_id` re-use. 

If you choose to assign node IDs, make sure to use a fresh `node_id` each time you add a node to the cluster.

:::caution
Never reuse node IDs, even for nodes that have been decommissioned and restarted empty. Doing so can result in an inconsistent state.
:::

## Upgrade considerations

Deployment automation should place each node into maintenance mode and wait for it to drain leaderships before restarting it with a newer version of Redpanda. For information about how to drive a rolling upgrade of a Redpanda cluster, see [Node Maintenance Mode](../../cluster-administration/node-management).

Rolling restarts preserve high availability and reduce
risk during upgrades. Check the cluster's health after upgrading each node. Rolling
back an upgrade to an earlier feature release is only supported until the last node
has been updated, so it's important to identify any issues before that point.

Commit message:

docs: add information about the storage_strict_data_init configuration property

docs/platform/deployment/custom-deployment.mdx, after:

---
title: Writing Custom Deployment Automation
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Writing Custom Redpanda Deployment Automation | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Technical guidance for engineers writing deployment systems for Redpanda."/>
</head>

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Redpanda supports several deployment tools for setting up a cluster:

- Ansible Playbook
- Helm Chart
- Kubernetes Operator

:::tip
Redpanda strongly recommends using one of these supported deployment tools. See [Deploying for Production](../../deployment/production-deployment).
:::

This page provides information for anyone creating their own 
automation for deploying Redpanda clusters; that is, anyone not using one
of these supported tools.

## Configure bootstrapping

Redpanda cluster configuration is written with the Admin API and
the `rpk cluster config` CLIs.

In the special case where you want to provide configuration to Redpanda
before it starts for the first time, you can write a `.bootstrap.yaml` file
in the same directory as `redpanda.yaml`.

This file is only read on the first startup of the cluster. Any subsequent
changes to `.bootstrap.yaml` are ignored, so changes to
cluster configuration must be done with the Admin API. 

The content format is a YAML dictionary of cluster configuration properties. For example, to initialize a cluster with Admin API authentication enabled
and a single superuser, the `.bootstrap.yaml` file would contain the following:

```
admin_api_require_auth: true
superusers:
- alice
```

With this configuration, the Admin API is not accessible until you bootstrap a user account.

## Bootstrap a user account

When using username/password authentication, it's helpful to be able to create one user before the cluster starts for the first time.

Do this by setting the `RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` environment variable
when starting Redpanda for the first time. The value has the format
`<username>:<password>`. For example, you could set `RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` to `alice:letmein`.

:::note
`RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` only creates a user account. You must still
set up authentication using cluster configuration.
:::

## Secure the Admin API

The Admin API is used to create SASL user accounts and ACLs, so it's
important to think about how you secure it when creating a cluster.

- No authentication, but listening only on 127.0.0.1: This may be appropriate
  if your Redpanda processes are running in an environment where only
  administrators can access the host.
- mTLS authentication: You can generate client and server x509 certificates
  before starting Redpanda for the first time, refer to them in 
  `redpanda.yaml`, and use the client certificate when accessing the Admin API.
- Username/password authentication: Use the combination of `admin_api_require_auth`,
  `superusers`, and `RP_BOOTSTRAP_USER` to access the Admin API username/password
  authentication. You probably still want to enable TLS on the Admin API
  endpoint to protect credentials in flight.

## Configure the seed servers

Seed servers help new nodes join a cluster by directing requests from newly-started nodes to an existing cluster. The `seed_servers` node configuration property controls how Redpanda finds its peers when initially forming a cluster. It is dependent on the `empty_seed_starts_cluster` node configuration property.

Starting in Redpanda version 22.3, you should explicitly set `empty_seed_starts_cluster` to `false` on every node, and every node in the cluster should have the same value set for `seed_servers`. With this set of configurations, Redpanda clusters form with these guidelines:

- When a node starts and it is a seed server (its address is in the `seed_servers` list), it waits for all other seed servers to start up, and it forms a cluster with all seed servers as members.
- When a node starts and it is not a seed server, it sends requests to the seed servers to join the cluster. 
 
It is essential that all seed servers have identical values for the `seed_servers` list. Redpanda strongly recommends at least three seed nodes when forming a cluster. Each seed server decreases the likelihood of unintentionally forming a split brain cluster. To ensure nodes can always discover the cluster, at least one seed node should be available at all times.

By default, for backward compatibility, `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is set to `true`, and Redpanda clusters form with the guidelines used prior to version 22.3:
- When a node starts with an empty `seed_servers` list, it creates a single node cluster with itself as the only member.
- When a node starts with a non-empty `seed_servers` list, it sends requests to the nodes in that list to join the cluster. 
 
You should never have more than one node with an empty `seed_servers` list, which would result in the creation of multiple clusters.

:::important
Redpanda expects its storage to be persistent, and it's an error
to erase a node's drive and restart it. However, in some environments (like when migrating to a different node pool on Kubernetes), truly persistent storage is unavailable,
and nodes may find their data volumes erased. For such environments, Redpanda recommends setting `empty_seed_starts_cluster` to false and designating a set of seed nodes such that they couldn't lose their storage simultaneously.
:::

## Configure strict data volumes

By default when Redpanda starts it will look for its data volume and initialize it if its empty. 
However, there are in cases where a node's drive was accidently erased or an incorrect drive was mounted to the data volume.
In these cases would be erroneous for Redpanda to initialize this incorrect data volume on start.
By default Redpanda has no way of distinguishing if a data volume is empty on purpose or by accident. Hence no way of avoid these errors.
Starting in Redpanda version 22.3 there is a configuration option `storage_strict_data_init` that can be set to allow Redpanda to
distinguish between a purposefully empty data volume and an accidently empty one.

When `storage_strict_data_init` is set to `true` on a node Redpanda will look for an empty file named `.redpanda_data_dir` in the root of its data volume.
If the file is not there Redpanda will refuse to start. This file has to be manually created when the data volume is created. And its
existence allows Redpanda to know whether the data volume its reading from is correct or not.

## Configure node IDs 

Redpanda automatically generates unique node IDs for each new node. This means that you don't need to include node IDs in configuration files or worry about policies on `node_id` re-use. 

If you choose to assign node IDs, make sure to use a fresh `node_id` each time you add a node to the cluster.

:::caution
Never reuse node IDs, even for nodes that have been decommissioned and restarted empty. Doing so can result in an inconsistent state.
:::

## Upgrade considerations

Deployment automation should place each node into maintenance mode and wait for it to drain leaderships before restarting it with a newer version of Redpanda. For information about how to drive a rolling upgrade of a Redpanda cluster, see [Node Maintenance Mode](../../cluster-administration/node-management).

Rolling restarts preserve high availability and reduce
risk during upgrades. Check the cluster's health after upgrading each node. Rolling
back an upgrade to an earlier feature release is only supported until the last node
has been updated, so it's important to identify any issues before that point.
